Sequence to sequence learning has been successful in many tasks such as machine translation, speech recognition (Sutskever et al., 2014; Chorowski et al., 2015) and text summarization (Rush et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2016) amongst others. The dominant approach to date encodes the input sequence with a series of bi-directional recurrent neural networks (RNN) and generates a variable length output with another set of decoder RNNs, both of which interface via a soft-attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015). In machine translation, this architecture has been demonstrated to outperform traditional phrase-based models by large margins (Sennrich et al., 2016b; Zhou et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016; 82).

Multi-layer convolutional neural networks create hierarchical representations over the input sequence in which nearby input elements interact at lower layers while distant elements interact at higher layers. Hierarchical structure provides a shorter path to capture long-range dependencies compared to the chain structure modeled by recurrent networks, e.g. we can obtain a feature representation capturing relationships within a window of $n$ words by applying only $\scriptstyle { \mathcal { O } } ( { \frac { n } { k } } )$ convolutional operations for kernels of width $k$ , compared to a linear number ${ \mathcal { O } } ( n )$ for recurrent neural networks. Inputs to a convolutional network are fed through a constant number of kernels and non-linearities, whereas recurrent networks apply up to $n$ operations and non-linearities to the first word and only a single set of operations to the last word. Fixing the number of nonlinearities applied to the inputs also eases learning.

Recent work has applied convolutional neural networks to sequence modeling such as Bradbury et al. (2016) who introduce recurrent pooling between a succession of convolutional layers or Kalchbrenner et al. (2016) who tackle neural translation without attention. However, none of these approaches has been demonstrated improvements over state of the art results on large benchmark datasets. Gated convolutions have been previously explored for machine translation by Meng et al. (2015) but their evaluation was restricted to a small dataset and the model was used in tandem with a traditional count-based model. Architectures which are partially convolutional have shown strong performance on larger tasks but their decoder is still recurrent (Gehring et al., 2016).

In this paper we propose an architecture for sequence to sequence modeling that is entirely convolutional. Our model is equipped with gated linear units (Dauphin et al., 2016) and residual connections (He et al., 2015a). We also use attention in every decoder layer and demonstrate that each attention layer only adds a negligible amount of overhead. The combination of these choices enables us to tackle large scale problems (83).

We evaluate our approach on several large datasets for machine translation as well as summarization and compare to the current best architectures reported in the literature. On WMT'16 English-Romanian translation we achieve a new state of the art, outperforming the previous best result by 1.9 BLEU. On WMT'14 English-German we outperform the strong LSTM setup of Wu et al. (2016) by 0.5 BLEU and on WMT' 14 English-French we outperform the likelihood trained system of Wu et al. (2016) by 1.6 BLEU. Furthermore, our model can translate unseen sentences at an order of magnitude faster speed than Wu et al. (2016) on GPU and CPU hardware (84, 85).